Split the configuration guide into "introduction" and "reference" (#13402)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/config-reference.adoc

== Configuring Quarkus

Quarkus itself is configured via the same mechanism as your application. Quarkus reserves the `quarkus.` namespace
for its own configuration. For example to configure the HTTP server port you can set `quarkus.http.port` in
`application.properties`. All the Quarkus configuration properties are link:all-config[documented and searchable].

[IMPORTANT]
====
As mentioned above, properties prefixed with `quarkus.` are effectively reserved for configuring Quarkus itself and
therefore `quarkus.` should **never** be used as prefix for application specific properties.

In the previous examples using `quarkus.message` instead of `greeting.message` would result in unexpected behavior.
====

Quarkus does much of its configuration and bootstrap at build time and most configuration properties are read and used during the build.
These properties are _fixed at build time_ and it's not possible to change them at runtime.
You always need to repackage your application in order to reflect changes of such properties.

TIP: The properties fixed at build time are marked with a lock icon (icon:lock[]) in the link:all-config[list of all configuration options].

> However, some extensions do define properties _overridable at runtime_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, some extensions do define properties that are _overridable at runtime_.
```

Author: Hm, I'll change this to _"However, some extensions do define properties that can be _overriden at runtime_."_

Reviewer: :+1:

////
= Quarkus - Configuration Reference Guide

include::./attributes.adoc[]

:numbered:
:sectnums:
:sectnumlevels: 4
:toc:

In this reference guide we're going to describe various aspects of Quarkus configuration.
A Quarkus application and Quarkus itself (core and extensions) are both configured via the same mechanism that leverages the https://microprofile.io/project/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config] API.
Quarkus configuration is based on https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-config[SmallRye Config], an implementation of the MicroProfile Config specification.
All of the standard features are supported.
Moreover, there are several additional features which are made available by the SmallRye Config project as well as by Quarkus itself.

TIP: If you're looking for information how to make a Quarkus extension configurable then see the <<writing-extensions.adoc#configuration,Writing Your Own Extension>> guide.

[[configuration_sources]]
== Configuration Sources

By default, Quarkus reads configuration properties from several sources (in decreasing priority):

1. System properties
2. Environment variables

> 3. A file named `.env` placed in the current working directory

Reviewer: It should probably be noted that this file is used to determine properties using ENV VAR naming rules, not regular property naming rules.

Author: Yes, it is mentioned below in the detail section. This list should be short and concise. Maybe we should make all list items links to relevant detail sections?

Reviewer: I like the idea

4. A configuration file placed in `$PWD/config/application.properties`
5. An application configuration file, i.e. `src/main/resources/application.properties`

=== System properties

* for a runner jar: `java -Dquarkus.datasource.password=youshallnotpass -jar target/myapp-runner.jar`
* for a native executable: `./target/myapp-runner -Dquarkus.datasource.password=youshallnotpass`

=== Environment variables

* for a runner jar: `export QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD=youshallnotpass ; java -jar target/myapp-runner.jar`
* for a native executable: `export QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD=youshallnotpass ; ./target/myapp-runner`

NOTE: Environment variables names are following the conversion rules of link:https://github.com/eclipse/microprofile-config/blob/master/spec/src/main/asciidoc/configsources.asciidoc#default-configsources[Eclipse MicroProfile]

=== File named `.env` placed in the current working directory

.Example `.env` file
[source,properties]
----
QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD=youshallnotpass <1>
----
<1> The name `QUARKUS_DATASOURCE_PASSWORD` is converted using the same rules as for <<environment_variables>>.

> For dev mode, this file can be placed in the root of the project, but it is advised to not check it in to version control.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For dev mode, this file can be placed in the root of the project, but it is advised to **not** check it in to version control.
```

Keep in mind however that any cleaning operation from the build tool like `mvn clean` or `gradle clean` will remove the `config` directory as well.

=== An application configuration file: `src/main/resources/application.properties`

.Example `application.properties` file
[source,properties]
----
greeting.message=hello <1>
quarkus.http.port=9090 <2>
----
<1> This is a user-defind configuration property.
<2> This is a configuration property consumed by `quarkus-vertx-http` extension.

TIP: Quarkus supports the use of <<using_property_expressions,property expressions>> in the `application.properties` file.

== Injecting configuration properties

Quarkus uses https://microprofile.io/project/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config] annotations to inject the configuration properties in the application.

[source,java]
----
@ConfigProperty(name = "greeting.message") <1>
String message;
----
<1> You can use `@Inject @ConfigProperty` or just `@ConfigProperty`.
The `@Inject` annotation is not necessary for members annotated with `@ConfigProperty`.

> This behavior which differs from https://microprofile.io/project/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This behavior differs from https://microprofile.io/project/eclipse/microprofile-config[MicroProfile Config].
```

> NOTE: If the application attempts to inject a configuration property that is not set, an error is thrown.
> So you can quickly know when your configuration is complete.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
NOTE: If the application attempts to inject a configuration property that is not set, an error is thrown, thus allowing you to quickly know when your configuration is complete.
```

diminishing the possibility of typos and providing more flexibility in property definitions.

[#combine-property-env-var]
== Combining Property Expressions and Environment Variables

Quarkus also supports the combination of both property expressions and environment variables.

Let's assume you have following property defined in `application.properties`:

[source,properties]
----
remote.host=quarkus.io
----

You can combine environment variables and property expressions by having a property defined as follows:

[source,properties]
----
application.host=${HOST:${remote.host}}
----

This will expand the `HOST` environment variable and use the value of the property `remote.host` as the default value if `HOST` is not set.

For the purpose of this section we used the property `remote.host` we defined previously.
It has to be noted that the value could have been a fixed one such as in:

[source,properties]
----
application.host=${HOST:localhost}
----

which will result in `localhost` as the default value if `HOST` is not set.

[[configuring_quarkus]]
== Configuring Quarkus

Quarkus itself is configured via the same mechanism as your application. Quarkus reserves the `quarkus.` namespace

> for its own configuration. For example to configure the HTTP server port you can set `quarkus.http.port` in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for its own configuration and the configuration of all of its extensions. For example to configure the HTTP server port you can set `quarkus.http.port` in
```

By placing an `application.properties` file inside a directory named `config` which resides in the directory where the application runs, any runtime properties defined in that file will override the default configuration. 
Furthermore any runtime properties added to this file that were not part of the original `application.properties` file
_will also_ be taken into account.
This works in the same way for runner jar and the native executable.

NOTE: The `config/application.properties` feature is available in development mode as well. To make use of it, `config/application.properties` needs to be placed inside the build tool's output directory (`target` for Maven and `build/classes/java/main` for Gradle).
Keep in mind however that any cleaning operation from the build tool like `mvn clean` or `gradle clean` will remove the `config` directory as well.

[[application_properties_file]]
=== An application configuration file

This is the main application configuration file located in `src/main/resources/application.properties`.

.Example `application.properties` file
[source,properties]
----
greeting.message=hello <1>
quarkus.http.port=9090 <2>
----

> <1> This is a user-defind configuration property.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> This is a user-defined configuration property.
```

For the greeting properties above, a `GreetingConfiguration` class could be created like so:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import io.quarkus.arc.config.ConfigProperties;
import java.util.Optional;

@ConfigProperties(prefix = "greeting") <1>
public class GreetingConfiguration {

    private String message;
    private String suffix = "!"; <2>
    private Optional<String> name;

    public String getMessage() {
        return message;
    }

    public void setMessage(String message) {
        this.message = message;
    }

    public String getSuffix() {
        return suffix;
    }

    public void setSuffix(String suffix) {
        this.suffix = suffix;
    }

    public Optional<String> getName() {
        return name;
    }

    public void setName(Optional<String> name) {
        this.name = name;
    }
}
----
<1> `prefix` is optional. If not set then the prefix to be used will be determined by the class name. In this case it would still be `greeting` (since the `Configuration` suffix is removed). If the class were named `GreetingExtraConfiguration` then the resulting default prefix would be `greeting-extra`.

> <2> `!` will be the default value if `greeting.suffix` is not set

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<2> `!` will be the default value if `greeting.suffix` is not set.
```

This class could then be injected into the `GreetingResource` using the familiar CDI `@Inject` annotation like so:

[source,java]
----
@Inject
GreetingConfiguration greetingConfiguration;
----

Another alternative style provided by Quarkus is to create `GreetingConfiguration` as an interface like so:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import io.quarkus.arc.config.ConfigProperties;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.inject.ConfigProperty;
import java.util.Optional;

@ConfigProperties(prefix = "greeting")
public interface GreetingConfiguration {

    @ConfigProperty(name = "message") <1>
    String message();

    @ConfigProperty(defaultValue = "!")
    String getSuffix(); <2>

    Optional<String> getName(); <3>
}
----

> <1> The `@ConfigProperty` annotation is needed because the name of the configuration property that the method corresponds to doesn't follow the getter method naming conventions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<1> The `@ConfigProperty` annotation is needed because the name of the configuration property that the method corresponds to doesn't follow the getter method naming conventions.
```

    GreetingConfiguration greetingConfiguration;

    @ConfigPrefix("other") <2>
    GreetingConfiguration otherConfiguration;

}
----
<1> At this injection point `greetingConfiguration` will use the `greeting` prefix since that is what has been defined on `@ConfigProperties`.
<2> At this injection point `otherConfiguration` will use the `other` prefix from `@ConfigPrefix` instead of the `greeting` prefix. Notice that in this case `@Inject` is not required.

[[configuration_profiles]]
== Configuration Profiles

Quarkus supports the notion of configuration profiles. 
These allow you to have multiple configurations in the same file and select between them via a profile name.

The syntax for this is `%{profile}.config.key=value`. For example if I have the following:

[source,properties]
----
quarkus.http.port=9090
%dev.quarkus.http.port=8181
----

The Quarkus HTTP port will be 9090, unless the `dev` profile is active, in which case it will be 8181.

To use profiles in the `.env` file, you can follow a `_{PROFILE}_CONFIG_KEY=value` pattern. An equivalent of the above example in an `.env` file would be:

[source,.env]
----
QUARKUS_HTTP_PORT=9090
_DEV_QUARKUS_HTTP_PORT=8181
----

> By default Quarkus has three profiles, although it is possible to use as many as you like. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By default, Quarkus has three profiles, although it is possible to use as many as you like. 
```

[source,properties]
----
remote.host=quarkus.io
----
and another property defined as:

[source,properties]
----
callable.url=https://${remote.host}/
----

will result in the value of the `callable.url` property being set to:

[source,properties]
----
callable.url=https://quarkus.io/
----

Another example would be defining different database servers depending on the profile used:

[source,properties]
----
%dev.quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:mysql://localhost:3306/mydatabase?useSSL=false
quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:mysql://remotehost:3306/mydatabase?useSSL=false
----

can be simplified by having:

[source,properties]
----
%dev.application.server=localhost
application.server=remotehost

quarkus.datasource.jdbc.url=jdbc:mysql://${application.server}:3306/mydatabase?useSSL=false
----

It does result in one more line in this example but the value of `application.server` can be reused in other properties,
diminishing the possibility of typos and providing more flexibility in property definitions.

[#combine-property-env-var]
== Combining Property Expressions and Environment Variables

Quarkus also supports the combination of both property expressions and environment variables.

> Let's assume you have following property defined in `application.properties`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Let's assume you have the following property defined in `application.properties`:
```

[source,properties]
----
remote.host=quarkus.io
----

You can combine environment variables and property expressions by having a property defined as follows:

[source,properties]
----
application.host=${HOST:${remote.host}}
----

This will expand the `HOST` environment variable and use the value of the property `remote.host` as the default value if `HOST` is not set.

For the purpose of this section we used the property `remote.host` we defined previously.
It has to be noted that the value could have been a fixed one such as in:

[source,properties]
----
application.host=${HOST:localhost}
----

which will result in `localhost` as the default value if `HOST` is not set.

[[configuring_quarkus]]
== Configuring Quarkus

Quarkus itself is configured via the same mechanism as your application. Quarkus reserves the `quarkus.` namespace
for its own configuration and the configuration of all of its extensions. For example to configure the HTTP server port you can set `quarkus.http.port` in
`application.properties`. All the Quarkus configuration properties are link:all-config[documented and searchable].

[IMPORTANT]
====

> As mentioned above, properties prefixed with `quarkus.` are effectively reserved for configuring Quarkus itself and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As mentioned above, properties prefixed with `quarkus.` are effectively reserved for configuring Quarkus itself and its extensions.
```

> therefore `quarkus.` should **never** be used as prefix for application specific properties.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Therefore `quarkus.` should **never** be used as prefix for application specific properties.
```

In the previous examples using `quarkus.message` instead of `greeting.message` would result in unexpected behavior.
====

> Quarkus does much of its configuration and bootstrap at build time and most configuration properties are read and used during the build.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Quarkus does much of its configuration and bootstrap at build time and some configuration properties are read and used during the build.
```

These properties are _fixed at build time_ and it's not possible to change them at runtime.
You always need to repackage your application in order to reflect changes of such properties.

TIP: The properties fixed at build time are marked with a lock icon (icon:lock[]) in the link:all-config[list of all configuration options].

However, some extensions do define properties that can be _overriden at runtime_.

> A canonical example is the database URL, username and password which is only known specifically in your target environment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A canonical example is the database URL, username and password which are only known specifically in your target environment.
```

it easy to see what Quarkus configuration options are available. To do this, run:

[source,bash]
--
./mvnw quarkus:generate-config
--

This will create a `src/main/resources/application.properties.example` file that contains all the config options
exposed via the extensions you currently have installed. These options are commented out, and have their default value
when applicable. For example this HTTP port config entry will appear as:

[source,properties]
--
#
# The HTTP port
#
#quarkus.http.port=8080
--

Rather than generating an example config file, you can also add these to you actual config file by setting the `-Dfile`
parameter:

[source,bash]
--
./mvnw quarkus:generate-config -Dfile=application.properties
--

If a config option is already present (commented or not) it will not be added, so it is safe to run this after
adding an additional extension to see what additional options have been added.

== Clearing properties

Run time properties which are optional, and which have had values set at build time or which have a default value,
may be explicitly cleared by assigning an empty string to the property.  Note that this will _only_ affect

> run time properties, and will _only_ work with properties whose values are not required.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
runtime properties, and will _only_ work with properties whose values are not required.
```

The property may be cleared by setting the corresponding `application.properties` property, setting the
corresponding system property, or setting the corresponding environment variable.

[[custom_configuration]]
== Custom Configuration

=== Custom configuration sources

You can also introduce custom configuration sources in the standard MicroProfile Config manner.  To
do this, you must provide a class which implements either `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSource`
or `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.ConfigSourceProvider`.  Create a
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/ServiceLoader.html[service file] for the
class and it will be detected and installed at application startup.

=== Custom configuration converters

> You can also use your custom types as a configuration values. This can be done by implementing `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter<T>`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also use your custom types for configuration values. This can be done by implementing `org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter<T>`
```

and adding its fully qualified class name in the `META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter` file.

Let us assume you have a custom type like this one:

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

public class MicroProfileCustomValue {

    private final int number;

    public MicroProfileCustomValue(int number) {
        this.number = number;
    }

    public int getNumber() {
        return number;
    }
}
----

The corresponding converter will look like the one below. Please note that your custom converter class must be `public` and must have
a `public` no-argument constructor. It also must not be `abstract`.

[source,java]
----
package org.acme.config;

import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter;

public class MicroProfileCustomValueConverter implements Converter<MicroProfileCustomValue> {

    @Override
    public MicroProfileCustomValue convert(String value) {
        return new MicroProfileCustomValue(Integer.valueOf(value));
    }
}
----

Then you need to include the fully qualified class name of the converter in a service file `META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter`.

> If you have more converters, simply add their class names in this file as well. Single fully qualified class name per line, for example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have more converters, simply add their class names in this file as well. One fully qualified class name per line, for example:
```

[source]
----
org.acme.config.MicroProfileCustomValueConverter
org.acme.config.SomeOtherConverter
org.acme.config.YetAnotherConverter
----

> Please note that `SomeOtherConverter` and `YetAnotherConverter` were added just for a demonstration. If you include in this file classes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Please note that `SomeOtherConverter` and `YetAnotherConverter` were added just for demonstration purposes. If you include in this file classes
```

which are not available at runtime, the converters loading will fail.

> After this is done you can use your custom type as a configuration value:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After this is done, you can use your custom type as a configuration value:
```

[source,java]
----
@ConfigProperty(name = "configuration.value.name")
MicroProfileCustomValue value;
----

==== Converter priority

In some cases, you may want to use a custom converter to convert a type which is already converted
by a different converter. In such cases, you can use the `javax.annotation.Priority` annotation to
change converters precedence and make your custom converter of higher priority than the other

> on the list.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in the list.
```

----
package org.acme.config;

import javax.annotation.Priority;
import org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter;

@Priority(150)
public class MyCustomConverter implements Converter<MicroProfileCustomValue> {

    @Override
    public MicroProfileCustomValue convert(String value) {

        final int secretNumber;
        if (value.startsFrom("OBF:")) {
            secretNumber = Integer.valueOf(SecretDecoder.decode(value));
        } else {
            secretNumber = Integer.valueOf(value);
        }

        return new MicroProfileCustomValue(secretNumber);
    }
}
----

Since it converts the same value type (namely `MicroProfileCustomValue`) and has a priority
of 150, it will be used instead of a `MicroProfileCustomValueConverter` which has a default
priority of 100.

NOTE: This new converter also needs to be listed in a service file, i.e. `META-INF/services/org.eclipse.microprofile.config.spi.Converter`.

[[yaml]]
== YAML for Configuration

=== Add YAML Config Support

You might want to use YAML over properties for configuration.
Since link:https://github.com/smallrye/smallrye-config[SmallRye Config] brings support for YAML
configuration, Quarkus supports this as well.

> First you will need to add the YAML extension to your `pom.xml`:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First you will need to add the Config YAML extension to your `pom.xml`:
```
